This is oil. [music] Well, actually,
this is a mixture of black trial and
vegetable glycerin, but it looks like
oil. And while the real thing is being
thrown [music] around by geopolitical
tumult from Iran to Venezuela, you can
still buy a lot for comparatively
little.
>> The early days of 2025, oil prices were
closer to $80 a barrel.
>> Since then, there have been slumps and
spikes. But still, an ounce of silver is
now worth more than a barrel of oil.
>> And the price of crude would be even
lower if China hadn't soaked some up
into its massive [music] reserves. The
stuff's cheaper today than it was more
than a decade ago, even before adjusting
for inflation. Pretty weird in a world
ruled by inflation. And it gets weirder
still.
>> We've seen this surprise or shock twist
from the OPEC plus alliance in turning
its strategy on its head. from
protecting the oil price [music] to
opening the taps.
>> There's a massive oil glut out there at
the moment. We're not short of oil.
>> The irony is that climate risks are
accelerating, but the systems finding
reasons to produce more oil.
Recent developments in Karacas and
Kazakhstan are only adding to price
volatility in both directions. That's
before factoring in tensions between the
US and Iran. One of the biggest changes
that we have seen in the global oil
landscape over the last 10 years have
been that the typical correlation of
crisis in the Middle East, higher oil
prices has broken. So now an urgent
question is taking hold. What happens
when the oil market's assumptions break
down?
>> [music]
>> fossil fuel.
>> Let's just get ahead of something here.
Many people are disincined to mourn big
oil's difficulties or the budget pain of
oil rich states. [music] But the reality
is oil prices shape costs and decisions
for all of us. When we drive, when we
fly, when we get on a ship across the
ocean, pretty much everything in your
pocket, your mobile phone, uh [music]
pens, anything that has a plastic
coating on originally came from a barrel
of crude oil.
>> When the price of oil goes up, inflation
goes up and central banks have to
intervene, increase interest rates,
which can bring unemployment higher. It
can destroy value in the equity market.
>> The oil price matters in part because
it's a sign of the functioning of the
global economy. And here's the thing,
prices have been on a roller coaster
over the past few years.
>> Brent crude, which is what we call the
benchmark uh for the global oil price,
dropped 18% last year. That's the most
since the pandemic.
>> During the pandemic, what we saw was a
true emergency.
>> A swath of global oil production
completely shut down when prices went
below zero.
But then in 2022,
>> following the war in Ukraine, we had
prices rising to $140 a barrel. And now
that hydrocarbon rich slurry of
prehistoric plankton is down around $70
a barrel, a price that's been bolstered
by the latest in a string of spikes as
traders fret about US pressure on Iran.
But when it comes [music] to the broader
downward trend in oil price, this time
is different. And the reason, which
we'll explain shortly, is causing
particular concern
>> for oil producing economies [music]
like Venezuela, Iran, or Russia, where
the governments rely on revenue from the
oil to [music] to go into their budgets.
>> You have OPEC nations who need oil
prices well in excess of $100 a barrel
to cover their spending plans.
>> Those are the members of a coalition of
producers led by Saudi Arabia. The
average forecast from major banks puts
oil prices at around or just below $60 a
barrel this year. For countries like
Saudi Arabia, that's well short of the
break even price their economies need.
The discrepancy is even greater for
Kazakhstan, [music]
Algeria, and Iran.
They're going to get less tax revenue
than the oil companies surely and anyone
who works around the oil companies are
going to suffer.
>> And in fact, they already are. The first
wave of cuts that we've seen has been
more geared towards non-core [music]
businesses for the companies that sort
of reached out into the power markets
into utility sectors and reigning in
some of those investments.
There's precedent for this. In the late
'90s, back when TV news footage was
annoyingly grainy. Oil dropped below $10
a barrel. It prompted companies to even
fire the geologists they relied on to
find the next big field. We have not
seen that yet. But there is always a
risk.
>> Okay. So why is all this happening?
>> The drop in oil prices this time is very
different to the one we saw in 2020. The
driver this time is oil supply.
>> Guyana is a country which uh a few years
ago didn't produce any oil at all.
>> And today it produces close to a million
barrels a day. That makes it a
significant global producer. Even
Argentina is having its own mini shale
boom at the moment. other countries like
Brazil, [music] Canada, and even the US
is is pumping at record levels.
>> A decade ago, the the US was unable to
export to global markets. Today, it's
exporting an enormous amount of oil,
sometimes four or 5 million barrels a
day of crude oil to global markets.
To put this into some context, for 75
years, the US imported as many as 14
million barrels of oil a day to fill a
deficit. But America's domestic shale
production boom has flipped this to
create a surplus. And there it is.
>> We simply have too many barrels of oil
hitting the market arriving from every
corner.
>> The International Energy Agency
estimates that supply is going to
outpace demand by about 4 million
barrels a day this year, perhaps
slightly less. To put it in context,
imagine two giant super tankers, the
biggest types of ship that can carry
crude oil popping up off the coast of
the UK or off the coast of Texas in the
US every single day for the year. That
would lead you by the end of the year to
have something like 3 to 700 tankers
sitting there doing nothing because
they're not needed.
>> Output from OPEC nations led by Saudi
Arabia and Russia has also surged.
>> That started in the first half of last
year, sort of accelerated over the
course of the year. surprising the
market, surprising traders. It's
>> like why why you will increase output on
an over supply market and I think that
the reason is that they want to regain
market share. They are going to
compromise for a period uh accepting low
oil prices in the hope that over time
the supply will come down from other
sources and that there will be more need
for OPEC oil. But that's a big bet and
it's a bet that can be completely
derailed if President Trump gets control
of the Venezuelan oil and is able to
over time develop that resource.
And that's a story for the back end of
this decade for 2029 to 2030. Trump
himself has been saying that it's going
to take a while for Venezuelan oil to
meaningfully [music] return to where it
was in years past. And there are some in
the oil market who think it may never
get there. But it's going to [music]
take a significant amount of investment
to see a major increase to the tune of
several hundred,000 barrels a day in
Venezuelan output. That's for sure.
>> But here's the thing about those
barrels.
>> We only need the market to perceive that
they are coming to that have an impact
on the oil price. [music]
>> Another data point that we look at uh is
what we call oil on the water. So that's
a a count of the barrels that are either
transiting around the world getting to
where they need to be or else uh in
floating storage and and and that tally
has increased [music]
over the course of last year. Part of
that is that oil from sanctioned
countries like Russia, Iran or Venezuela
might be finding [music] it uh a bit
more difficult to find buyers.
>> Let me remind you that oil supply is
floating [music] in dark fleet ships in
places like the South China Sea. One of
the biggest drivers of global oil
markets in the last year has been the
[music] difference between sanctioned
and unsanctioned oil. Something made all
the more significant during the first
few weeks of this year given threats to
Iranian, Venezuelan, and Russian supply.
>> Russia certainly had some difficulties
selling its oil as a result of the
sanctions [music] and and restrictions
that we've seen placed on its
production. As sanctions tightened on
Russia following its full-scale invasion
of Ukraine, a shadow economy emerged,
utilizing that so-called [music] dark
fleet of aging uninsured tankers.
By repainting names and faking flags,
switching off their transponders, these
ghost ships vanished from the map.
Initially, there were only a few of
these tankers. Today, probably 20 to 25%
of the global oil tanker fleet is what
we call the DAR fleet. Most of the
customers of that oil have been in the
global south.
>> They don't really go into the places we
normally look at to set global oil
prices.
>> For instance, China, which hoovered up
millions of barrels in 2025, into its
vast stockpile. Some of that is Russian
crude, which the war pushed into the
shadows. But if the conflict were to
end, it wouldn't stay there forever. So
perhaps the biggest change of a peace
deal in Ukraine would be the return of
some of those barrels into more
transparent, more western linked pricing
hubs and that could weigh on oil prices.
The Traffic Euro [music] Group, which is
one of the world's biggest independent
traders a couple of weeks ago, came out
with a prediction saying that we're at
risk of seeing a [music] super glut.
And that matters because oil prices
don't stay confined to trading desks.
They [music] seep into our budgets, our
travel plans, and whatever's in our back
pockets. They shape how much oil the
world uses. And while the market can
discount a barrel, the climate can't.
That cost can be expected to keep
rising.
[music]